fibroids are smooth muscle masses in the uterus that also go by the name of leiomyomata. they are benign (with a chance of 1 in 1000 for malignancy). fibroids occur by way of two hormonal processes -  one is estrogen, which stimulates *monoclonal* smooth muscle proliferations, and the second is progesterone which stimulates proteins that inhibit apoptosis. mostly (60% of the time), these fibroids are asymptomatic, but when the fibroids become too large for blood supply or outgrow supply, they may become painful: as and when they're in this state, they start degenerating, aka degenerative state, may start calcifiying, or may have *sarcomatous* changes, or acquire a *parasitic* blood supply (which I don't understand fully well, but I assume it means there are other ways it acquires blood supply). Fibroids *are* a *common* indication for major surgery in women.  fibroids are most commonly seen in black women (who may have it earlier and larger in size). fibroids are diagnosed in 40-50% of women over the age of 35 who are _**not**_ premenopausal. Although, in asymptomatic conditions, we hope the fibroids go away after menopause. Fibroids in 30% of women can be a source of abnormal uterine bleeding and accompany dysmenorrhea and heavy menstrual bleeding. this time, if the woman is over 40, an endometrial biopsy is taken to rule out uterine cancer. fibroids arise from either the pure muscular wall of the uterus, the myometrium that may peek in to the cavity, the serosa, or the vagina/ cervix. the first type is known as intramural, the second is known as submucosal, third: subserosal and then there is the vagina and cervical types. for assessing locations, a pelvic ultrasound will be helpful, and is also the test to confirm the diagnosis. there is a special test known as sonohysterogram which differentiates between an endometrial polyp and a serosal fibroid, and/or for detecting any intracavitery masses or lesions. but before that, a simple bimanual examination would show an asymmetrical enlarged uterus that may be mobile. on CBC, anemia may be present. this would fall under the category of the 30% of those fibroid patients who experience bleeding. pain is also an issue to be addressed in fibroids. a painful fibroid may be either due to a large enough growth that does not get blood supply, or a torsion if it is pedunculated. complications related to fibroids are divided into asymptomatic (60%), bleeding (30%), bulk symptoms (20-50%), and pregnancy-related. most women are asymptomatic as we already said. bleeding was previously discussed, these are the few that experience abnormal uterine (AUB) as well as menstrual bleeding which is heavy. bulk symptoms are due to the size and weight. they cause a pelvic heaviness, increased abdominal girth, urinary urgency and frequency, constipation and rarely, bloating. mind here, that when urinary bladder cannot be emptied in the rare cases, it becomes a surgical emergency due to risk of bladder burst. when going for pregnancy, the primary issue is infertility, followed by unfortunate recurrent pregnancy losses. the complications that arise when pregnant- are a potential for growth of the fibroid causing pain, being a source of obstruction in the uterus, causing malpresentation of the baby, and lastly, making c-sections difficult. 

how should we manage? well firstly, a fibroid that is stable and no more than 6-8 cm in size is okay and not to be dealt with. we want to do something about if there is either bleeding, rapid growth and/or intracavitary lesion. we do not want to touch the fibroid in a pregnant woman due to risk of bleeding, but keep an eye on it with ultrasounds. other conservative approaches will involve non-submucosal types. SUBMUCOSAL fibroids have to be dealt with as they'll be symptomatic (is it because of vasculature?) there are some medications that can be given. firstly, we have GnRH receptor agonist known as leuprolide or [[Lupron]] (R), this can correct anemia, shrink fibroid and reduce the risk of bleeding. now would be an important time to understand [[hormones in females]]. Lupron should be given for 3 months in anticipation of a surgery, or preoperatively. you could also give it long-term to bridge the gap between now and menopause with hopes that the fibroid will subside and an 'addback' option of [[progestin]] or [[estrogen]]. Other drugs include tranexamic acid (cyklokapron(R)). Do not forget about [[combination hormonal contraceptives]] (CHC) and intra-uterine systems (IUS) (?) and [[Depo-Provera]] (R). A drug that is discontinued in Canada for hepatotoxicity is [[Fibristal]] (R) - ulipristal acetate; it is dosed at 5mg OD for 3 months and reduces and shrinks fibroids. the mechanism for reduction might be the same in lupron and combination contraceptives. 

lets go to non-medical approaches. UAE or[[ uterine artery embolectomy]] is done by [[interventional radiology]]. this will shrink the fibroid by 50% over 6 months period, improves the heavy bleeding in 90% of patients within 1 to 2 months. contraindications are women of child-bearing age or family planning. surgical approaches have a high risk of _re-intervention_. Myomectomy (which can be approached laparoscopically, via hysteroscopy or transabdominally). Hysteroscopic resection of fibroid and endometrial ablation for AUB-Lsm (?) and hysterectomy. 


GY14
[[!main!]] [[Drugs]]