intracerebral hemorrhage is defined as a bleed in the cerebral parenchyma. it accounts for 10% of strokes. the hemorrhage can penetrate the ventricles causing IVH or dissect the cortical surface causing subarachnoid hemorrhage. the hit points for ICH are non-white males above the age of 55 with a history of hypertension (vulnerable locations for hypertensives are putamen, thalamus, pons, cerebellum). the probability of a previous CVA severely increases the risk. baseline ICH score is taken in the beginning which is [[glasgow coma scale]], ICH volume (measured in cm, >30 or <30), origin of the bleed (either infratentorium or not), presence of ventricular dissection (IVH), and lastly a cut-off age of 80. vascular causes could include arterio-venous malformaiton, aneurysm or venous sinus thrombosis (see [[dural venous sinus]]). don't forget about some arteriopathies like cerebral amyloid arteriopathy, lipohyalinosis, and vasculitis. something known as hemorrhagic transformation which would include reperfusion post-stroke, via surgery or strenuous exercise. infectious causes can be HSV aka herpes simplex encephalitis, fungal, or 'granuloma', what kinds and how is an important one to know. hemorrhage can be triggered by a coagulopathy, when I'm asked differentials, I'd say leukemia, TPP, idiopathic, 'aplastic anemia'. going off of leukemia, mechanical causes of ICH could be malignancy like tumors, so [[gliobastoma multiforme]], lymphoma or metastases. tumors take up 1% of the chances of ICH. drugs, amphetamine, cocaine, alcohol can be a cause and heavy or chronic alcohol use can be a risk factor as well. post-surgery complications like post-carotid endarterectomy cerebral reperfusion and craniotomy(s). post-trauma, immediately or delayed, frontal or temporal lobes (which are caused by 'coup-contrecoup' mechanism). Never forget eclampsia

onto management, there is medical, surgical with the indications and contraindications to know. first step of medical management would be to lower the blood pressure to a target of 140/90. textbooks say decrease MAP by approx. 20%, but I don't know what that means. to eliminate or assess coagulation status, acquire a PTT to INR ratio. next, decrease the intracranial pressure, DO NOT GIVE CORTICOSTEROIDS if the pressue is high in ICH. seizure prophylaxis given are leviteracetam or phenytoin. get electrolytes to rule out uncommon causes like SIADH, but just get sodium potassium by default. 

before moving on to surgical, lets talk tests. first is a non-contrast CT which would show 'hyperdense' blood. a CT angio or CTA routine might demonstrate a growing clot, this is called a 'spot sign' - where the contrast is in the hematoma. an angiogram can be done to rule out vascular leisons if the patient is younger than 45, and or does not have hypertension. surgical approach is to do a craniotomy, embelectomy and decompress ventricular system if there has been penetration (hydrcephalus). other surgical treatments of source could be an a-v malformation, tumor, 'cavernoma'. what are some of the indications for surgery. firstly, it is rapid deterioration due to (maybe) brainstem compression. secondly, signs of high ICP or mass effect. Remember here that the telltale signs of an intracerebral hemorrhage are headache and neurologic deficits. you might see vomiting and nausea, but that is not the salient feature. therefore that is how ICP ties in here. as far as feasibility of surgery goes, below the age of 50 is a good factor, as well as a favorable location like the non-dominant hemisphere or cerebellum. if it is a suspected tumor or vascular anomaly, the likelihood of treating the ICH by surgery (by way of clipping or resection) is a good thing. 
contraindications to surgery could be severe GCS score or coma, a massive hemorrhage (esp in dominant hemisphere) and lost brainstem function. other minor contraindications could be risk vs reward, age, difficult location (basal ganglia) and coagulopathy. 

prognosis is poor with a 30d mortality rate of 44%, due to cerebral herniation and a rebleed rate of 2-6% is blood pressure is poorly controlled. some more added information is the location of bleeds. we see a basal ganglia or internal capsule region hemorrhage in 50% of the time, thalamus 15%, white matter also 15%, cerebellum and brainstem about 15% with pons being the most common, and the rest account for 5%. 

NS25, 26

[[!main!]]


