55 year old man comes to the office due to a 2-week history of reddish-brown urine associated with joint pain, fatigue and lower extremity rash. 

he reports no chest pain, dyspnea, sore throat, dysuria, or abdominal pain. he has no known chronic medical conditions and takes no medications. 

temp is 37.8C, blood pressure is 152/80, HR80, respirations are 12. oropharyngeal examination is unremarkable. heart sounds are normal, and the lungs are clear to ausculation bilaterally. the abdomen is nontender and nondistended. diffuse palpable purpura on both lower extremities. there is mild pain with movement of the knees and elbows but no swelling, erythema, warmth of the joints is present. lab: 

cbc 
hb 9.8 
plates 120 
wbc7.2 

SCr 1.7 

urinalysis 
2+ protein 
gross blood 
leukocyte esterase neg
nitrites neg 
wbc 1-2 
rbc many 
rbc cast 

complement 
C3 low 
C4 very low 

which of the following is most likely to establish the diagnosis? 

1. anti-cyclic citrilluinated peptide antibodies levels 
2. anti-glomerular basement membrane antibody levels 
3. antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody levels 
4. ASO levels 
5. serum cryoglobulin levels (c)

"complement levels are often helpful because hypocomplementemia (low C3 and C4) usually results from significant complement consumption due to immune complex IC-mediated GN. the primary causes of hypocomplementic, IC-mediated forms of GN and their corresponding lab findings include: 

PSGN - ASO titers 
MPGN - cryoglobulin 
lupus nephritis-ANA, anti-ds DNA 
endocarditis-assc GN-positive blood cultures 

MPGN results from the renal deposition of IC containg cryoglobulins, which are Ig generated by chronic viral infections or autoimmune diseases. MPGN is classically associated with cryoglobulinemic small-vessel vasculitis (palpable purpura, arthralgia) as in this patient. MPGN can be caused by chronic hep C, hep B, and HIV. therefore, serum cryoglobulin testing should be accompanied by viral serologies (hepatitis C might also explain this patient's thrombocytopenia)

lupus nephritis can also cause IC-mediated GN with associated hypocomplementemia, vasculitis, and thrombocytopenia and should be excluded in this patient (ANA, anti-dsDNA). blood cultures to rule out infectious endocarditis and should be obtained. IgA nephropathy/ vasculitis also cause IC-mediated GN, however, complement is typically normal because IgA activates complement poorly"

[[!main!]]

